# Versioning Approach for the Farm Emissions Model

## Purpose

Clear documentation and explicit versioning facilitate robust model management, allowing stakeholders to prepare and adapt effectively to changes. FEM's explicit versioning approach outlined below ensures transparency and ease of tracking model evolution, critical for accurate and reliable agricultural emissions reporting.

## Overview

The Farm Emissions Model (FEM) utilizes an **explicit versioning** approach structured as:

```
Release.Breaking.Feature.Fix
```

This approach ensures clarity, transparency, and manageability in software updates, particularly given the critical and dynamic nature of agricultural GHG emissions modelling.

### Definition of Version Components

- **Release**: Indicates the major annual software release. FEM adopts a yearly release cycle each December, integrating comprehensive scientific updates aligned with New Zealand's national Agricultural Inventory Model.
- **Breaking**: Signifies a significant change that alters existing input/output data structures, requiring downstream users to adapt their input or output processes.
- **Feature**: Denotes new functionality or capabilities that do not disrupt existing data structures.
- **Fix**: Represents minor corrections or adjustments to existing model components, such as bug fixes or minor data corrections.

## Release Cycle

FEM releases are published annually in December. For example, in December 2025, the version released will be:

```
v2025.1.0.0
```

Each annual release will incorporate the latest updates from New Zealand’s national Agricultural Inventory Model published earlier in the year. Annual releases are supported and maintained for at least 3 years from initial release date.

## Examples of Intra-Year Version Updates

### Breaking Changes

Breaking changes reflect significant modifications requiring users to adapt their existing data structures or code that interacts with FEM.

- **Example 1**: Introduction of a new mitigation technology resulting in fundamental changes to input data structures (e.g., adding new columns to existing data tables). This update would increment the breaking version:

```
v2025.2.0.0
```

- **Example 2**: Modifications in output emissions columns to align with standardised reporting schemas. This adjustment to output structures constitutes another breaking change:

```
v2025.3.0.0
```

### Feature Updates

Feature updates include additional functionalities or enhancements that extend the capability of FEM without altering fundamental data structures. For instance:

- Adding optional runtime parameters to the `run_FEM.R` script to enable more flexible execution or reporting scenarios. Such an update would increment the feature version:

```
v2025.3.1.0
```

### Fixes

Fix updates address minor errors or inaccuracies within the model’s existing features or equations. For example:

- Correcting a constant value within the FEM equations, enhancing accuracy without impacting existing data structures or requiring user adjustments. This update increments the fix version:

```
v2025.3.1.1
```

## Impact on Emission Calculations

All updates, whether breaking, feature, or fix-level, have the potential to impact the emissions calculations generated by FEM for individual farms. Therefore, users should carefully review release notes accompanying each software update to understand potential implications for their use cases.

## Publishing Version Updates

FEM comprises a set of components which include and extend beyond the codebase.

### Components published via Github

- The codebase is to be git tagged and released on GitHub.

Git tags within the codebase enable developers to easily checkout to different versions as required. They also enable users building downstream applications to automate updates via the GitHub REST API.

### Components published via MPI Website

- The FEM Methodology
- FEM Data Specification
- FEM Data Dictionary

## Synchronisation of Versions Across Components

Versions are synchronised across all FEM components described above. This ensures consistency and alignment across all critical FEM components.

However, supporting documents published on the MPI website may undergo asynchronous minor revisions, such as typo corrections or explanatory clarifications, without prompting a synchronised version update across all components. These minor revisions are indicated by an additional revision suffix (e.g. `v2025.3.1.1 Revision 2`) that only applies to the specific document concerned.

This approach prevents unnecessary version increments in the codebase due solely to minor corrections in supporting documentation.